---
layout: post
title: "Breaking down the barriers to Collective Action"
tags: technology, social media
---
Technology does not change the world—our use of it does. No matter how fast my
PC boots up or how high my monitor's resolution is, I go to sleep at night
reflecting on what _I've_ accomplished that day. It is not the awesomeness of
technology that moves our souls and ignites our passions, but the social
interactions made possible by technology. Reflecting on what has brought the
world to this point, Clay Shirky in his book, _Here Comes Everybody_, poses two
questions: "Why has group action largely been limited to formal organizations?"
and "What is happening now to change that?" Shirky states that collective action
is "the hardest kind of group effort," and attributes the dilemma of group
cohesion and shared responsibility to the difficulties of collective action.
People simply don't spontaneously organize on a large scale. Even something as
simple as a birthday party requires some management. Until recently, it has been
prohibitively difficult to execute cooperative action without institutional
management.

With the rise of social media and global networking, the costs of collective
sharing and collaboration have collapsed. Social media tools have made it _so_
easy for people to spontaneously share and collaborate on their interests that
these activities have fallen out of the purview of conventional management. It
is increasingly possible to facilitate collective action without traditional
management hierarchies. Clay said, "There is simply no commercially viable way
to let employees work on what interests them as the mood strikes." This
statement may have been more true in 2008, but today these barriers are falling
apart. Successful, loosely organized corporations have sprung up that illustrate
my point. Meet Valve Software—the company behind the Steam content delivery
system. Valve Software touts a flat management hierarchy, and [_The Wall Street Journal_](http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303379204577474953586383604.html)
introduced them with, "Welcome to the bossless company, where the hierarchy is
flat, pay is often determined by peers, and the workday is directed by employees
themselves." Valve is wildly successful and growing. While such an
organizational structure is not for everybody, it is time for corporations to
prepare for an era of cheap collective action and the global changes that come
with it.
